
                           TESTING THE CMD RAMLINK
                latest additions and/or corrections 2-2-2015

     Early version RAMLinks use the same power supply as a Commodore 1581 
disk drive. It has a four wire DIN plug and outputs +5VDC at 1 Amp and +12VDC 
at 0.5 Amps. The backup 6V battery for that RL uses a coax connector, center 
conductor positive. The later version RAMLink uses a different power supply, 
a single 9VDC 1 Amp wall adapter which connects to the RL with a coax 
connector, center conductor positive. Its battery connects with a standard 
1/8" mini-phone plug, tip positive. If you didn't get a battery and cable 
with your newer RL unit, use a stereo plug for the connection. The reason is 
that the space between the tip and sleeve is taken up with an unused ring 
connection. That arrangement will prevent shorting of the plug when inserted 
in or removed from the jack. Tape up the plug when disconnected from the RL
unit so it doesn't short to any metal. Shorting the battery will burn its 
wires!
     A computer with RAMLink connected takes few seconds longer to boot 
because it's installing the RL full native partition size as default at boot 
time. If the internal SIMM board is bad or is unplugged, the computer will 
boot quickly to its normal opening screen or may not boot, depending on what 
the problem is with the RAM card. JiffyDOS is automatically installed from 
the RAMLink because it's on the main board and is enabled by RL DOS. The 
computer's own JiffyDOS MUST be switched off, otherwise the RL-computer 
system will not boot or its operation will be erratic. 
     An initial test of the RL (a directory read) will show the RAM size of 
the of the on-board SIMM board -or- a RAM cart (you can't use both at the 
same time) if you press the F1 key. That's the standard JiffyDOS directory 
read command of the default RAM drive #16. If a disk drive is connected, F1 
will read device 8 (the disk drive) but you can switch between drive 8 and 
the RL drive 16 with CTRL-D or with the swap button on the RAMLink. 
     For further tests, load RAMTOOLS from the utilities disk to delete the 
default RL partition (which is the full size of all memory installed), then 
make a new partition to emulate a 1541 (or other drive) and finally, use 
MCOPY on the disk to copy an entire program disk over to the 1541 emulation 
partition. Use the device 8 swap button and run the program from the RAM 
disk. It loads very fast. I used Music Construction Set in my tests. 
     If the plug on the RAMLink-to-computer connector is dirty or oxidized, 
the computer may boot to a blank screen, a screen jumbled with characters or 
it will be intermittent. Use a pencil eraser (the replacement kind that has 
a triangular shape) to "polish" the connector contacts, then try the boot 
again. The contacts are copper and will oxidize over time. They should look 
shiny when clean. 
     If you encounter any problem with bootup or use of the RAMLink, try 
using the jumper cable supplied with the RL unit. The RL instructions say it 
must be used with a C64 and may be necessary (try it without the cable first)
with a C128. Sometimes it is required to correct the timing between devices. 
That cable connects to R44 in all early versions of the C64. R44 is a pull 
up resistor connected to U7 6510 CPU pin 28. For the short board 250469 in 
the C64C, the cable connects to IC6 8500 CPU pin 28. In all versions of the 
C128 including the European D and USA DCR, it connects to pin 41 of U11 PLA. 
The other end of the jumper cable goes to either pin of the two-pin connector 
in the RL opening just above the cart connector that plugs into the computer. 
Note it may only fit one way. 

Ray
     

