                                       8-19-2019

As of this writing...

     There are apparently several replacement modules on the market
now. The earliest, and I think it's still being sold, is the SwinSID
which is also the least expensive. One drawback of that one is the
lack of SID POT inputs, so a proportional mouse, paddle or graphics
tablet will not work. The joysticks use different inputs (keyboard
lines, actually) so they work OK. A later one is called the NANO 
SwinSID and has a smaller "footprint".
     Next up is the SwinSID Ultimate made by a guy in Hungry, but
those are not being manufactured any longer. I bought a bunch of
them before that guy quit producing. It can be programmed to emulate
a 6581 or 8580, change voicing, etc. with a small C64 BASIC program.
The sound level is a bit lower than an original SID but it sounds
very good and all functions including the POT inputs work fine. I 
heard this module has a problem with voicing when playing some 
older game carts. "Clowns" is apparently one of them. 
     There is now one called the FPGASID but I don't know anything
about that one. There is also a dual SID module which is of course
more expensive. 
     Lastly, there is one called the ARMSID which seems to be the 
best (in my oppinion) drop-in replacement and it doesn't need 
programming. I bought two of those for test purposes. They sound 
very good and all functions work the same as an original SID. It
auto-selects which SID (6581 or 8580) it emulates, NTSC or PAL, etc.
     I would go for one of the replacements rather than try to get
a good original SID since you can't tell how well (or how long) one 
will work. They run hot like the PLA and fail unexpectedly. The new 
modules run cool and should outlive us all. As far as where to buy, 
I'd start on Ebay or just ask around. I hope I got all this correct.

Ray
